[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> REGINA MEREDITH: Many of
you may have read the story
of the Peaceful
Warrior by Dan Millman.
A movie was ultimately
made on his story, which
continued to inspire
millions of people.
Why?
Because deep inside,
most of us wish
we had a wise sage to guide
us through life's mysteries
and challenges.
David Christopher's new
book, "The Holy Universe,"
offers us this level of insights
through a Sage and Seeker
story.
The insights shared are filled
with grace and deep truth.
It's called a book
for the spiritual,
but not necessarily
for the religious.
And that comes up again and
again reading about this book.
People who've let their
religions of youth
go, because they were
disillusioned or disappointed
in some of the dogma
or whatnot, are still
finding this gap in
themselves of something
that is more transcendent.
And it sounds like
that's your own story.
>> DAVID CHRISTOPHER: Yes.
I was looking for a story,
almost a holy story.
And after discovering
Brian Swimme's work
and Thomas Berry's work,
and Sister Miriam MacGillis,
and many other people
who are telling
this new scientific story
of creation, I loved it.
I loved it.
I took it all in and drank
so deeply from that well.
But then I found there was
part of me that wanted more.
I wanted more of the
scriptures that I grew up with.
And so not seeing any,
and getting encouragement
from others to go ahead
and write this story,
I went ahead and
wrote the story.
And it felt a little
audacious-- it still
feels a little audacious--
but it is a story of creation,
and all the way up from the
beginning of the universe
to present-day Earth.
>> REGINA: It does
have an awful lot--
as I said when I
introduced you--
a lot of depth and
a lot of wisdom.
And this is an area that
I've been profoundly
interested in for many years,
and as a result of interactions
with a being that I
hold very dear, who
told me, 30 years ago,
a revelatory version
of the process of
creation in the universe,
and into the earthly level
in realms, and the people,
and so forth.
So I'm always looking
for pixels of information
that overlay that and have
some similar truths to see
where the depth
is in that story.
>> CHRISTOPHER: Yeah, and it's
also a very physical story,
too, in that it takes
the physical science--
the best that science
has right now--
and it uses that as a
foundation to tell the story.
And then it goes into
some of the spirituality
that many of us
are familiar with.
But it really-- I also want
to bring that concreteness
of the physics, the astronomy,
and the chemistry, the biology,
and then even the anthropology
that is part of our truth, too.
>> REGINA: Yes, and that's
really important at this stage.
And there's one line that
keeps occurring over and over
in the book that we'll talk
about in a little bit, that
is really where the bridge
between spirituality
and science starts manifesting
itself in this work.
And a few years ago, I
interviewed Bernard Haisch.
I think it's "The God Theory."
And essentially
this has been what's
been emerging the last 10
years, above all other stories,
is that these scientists are
having this breakthrough of how
did our reality
construct itself?
How can this be random?
>> CHRISTOPHER: Yes.
And that line, "as if it
knew what it was doing."
>> REGINA: "As If it
>> CHRISTOPHER: Yeah, and it's
interesting that the Seeker
actually asked, what
do you mean by that?
And the answer
that the Sage gives
is-- the Sage gives the
idea of the infinite,
and uses that as the word to
describe ultimate reality,
or even better, the creative
force of the infinite.
Because the idea of God, or all
the names that we have for God
are just almost small
shadowy, egoic images
that don't even
begin to illuminate
the grandeur of this
creative process.
>> REGINA: And no one
takes exception to the word
"creative" force.
>> CHRISTOPHER:
Yes, yes, exactly.
And scientists don't.
I mean, it really is behaving--
from the very beginning
of the universe,
it is behaving as
if it knows exactly
what it's doing.
So even someone who is a
very strong atheist, who
doesn't believe in that
spiritual side of things,
can't argue with that.
Because the universe
is so finely tuned.
The expansion of the
universe was so precise,
that if it was just
a little bit slower,
it would collapse
back into itself.
And it was a little
bit faster, it
would have spun out and
dissipated into nothingness,
and never would have created
stars and planets and us.
So that was an interesting
line that came to me.
>> REGINA: Yeah, I
really liked that,
because the book is written
almost in the form, well,
of poetry.
It was very appropriately
used in that context.
And it made the book very
readable, too, I must say.
And that's why I wanted
to talk about this,
because the notion
of using poetry
to tell these deeper
stories, other
than just pure classical
poetry and such,
has not really been done.
This is still done in quite
a linear fashion, a very
understandable fashion, but
still has that grace to it
that a lengthy, lengthy
poem would have.
And so I congratulate you on
what you were able to do--
>> CHRISTOPHER: Thank you.
>> REGINA: --with this.
And yes, that whole
notion of this,
if it were just a little too
hot, we wouldn't be here.
This is interesting.
>> CHRISTOPHER: If the moon were
just a little bit further away,
if the asteroid that hit
Earth billions of years ago,
as she was forming, had tilted
it just a little bit too much,
we wouldn't have the seasons.
And who knows if life would have
been able to evolve in the way
it did.
Just so many things
are so finely tuned
that it just-- it's
an amazing story.
>> REGINA: It is.
And before we go,
I'll start going
through the first
part of the book.
Because it's a
Seeker Sage, right?
>> CHRISTOPHER: Yes.
>> REGINA: And so the Sage is
giving the Seeker some very
simple principles to
begin working with,
which is really to reveal how
disconnected we've become from
each other and ourselves,
how afraid we are.
And one of the
simple little things
she said to do within this--
to the man who was the Seeker--
was to go to an event.
And he had a birthday
party to go to.
>> CHRISTOPHER: Yes.
>> REGINA: Go to an event.
And instead of doing things
the normal way, why don't you
see if you can inspire
it so that everyone
tell a little story about the
person that's being celebrated.
And so let's talk about that.
Why did you choose to put
that in toward the beginning
of the book?
>> CHRISTOPHER: Well, one of my
early readers pointed out that
you're talking about story,
but you're not telling a story.
So why don't you, instead
of talking about the story,
tell the story of
this birthday, and go
into the characters and whatnot.
And I actually lived
this when I graduated
from my master's program.
We were supposed to tell the
story of what we learned.
And we had a number of
things-- what have you learned?
How does it apply to your life?
Where are you're going to
go next on your journey?
And I used that as the template.
It was about a
three-hour presentation
that you gave to your peers
and to some of your professors.
And that's where
I first realized
how important to be able
to tell your story is.
If we don't have a
chance to tell our story,
that's where I feel a lot of
celebrations begin to miss out.
And so from that
experience, I did a couple
of birthday parties,
where we had
just small stories about-- tell
what you like about the person.
Tell a small story about what
you like about the person.
And so that was the
model that I used.
And that's what
came out in that.
>> REGINA: But people are
amazingly uncomfortable.
>> CHRISTOPHER:
They begin to be.
And then they start
to dive into it,
to the point where, if you're
not careful, it can just--
it's sort of like, if
they realize that this
is so meaningful and rich,
they don't want to stop.
And they can go on too long.
So I think the Sage
actually says at one point,
it's important to have to
structure so that you don't
begin to hear car keys jangling.
>> REGINA: Right.
But it changes the dynamic
of the entire group,
and the quality
of the celebration
is completely
qualitatively different.
And what is the difference
there between, for example,
telling our story to each other,
versus being stuck in a story
and in essence
talking at each other?
>> CHRISTOPHER: The difference
between telling the story
and talking about it-- well,
actually that's part of what
the book gets into-- is the
larger stories of the cosmos,
and how they interrelate with
the stories we tell ourselves.
In fact, it was funny I was--
I believe you interviewed Joan
Borysenko about a
year, two years ago.
And she talked
about how important
it was to examine what
we tell ourselves.
And if we go
unconscious when we tell
the story, I think that's where
the difference is, where we're
automatically telling the
story, and not really thinking
about what we're saying and
what we're talking about,
versus telling the story
from a genuine place of this
is-- it's almost like I'm
there again in the situation
that I'm telling.
>> REGINA: Full
engagement, meaning.
>> CHRISTOPHER: Yes, yes.
So I think that's the
difference between the two.
>> DAVID CHRISTOPHER: So let's
talk about for you, personally,
there was something in your
life besides the spiritual part.
This is heavily focused on the
Earth's process of creation,
destruction, and so forth.
Was there something in
you, as a sensitive being,
that needed to have this
expression because there
was certain pain
in watching some
of what happens on the planet?
>> CHRISTOPHER: The first memory
I have of really caring about
this is when I was
eight years old.
And that's one of
the pieces that
was autobiographical
in the book,
is talking about
watching a television
show about the
extinction of species,
and becoming absolutely unglued.
And my siblings really
didn't-- they said, oh, well,
that's too bad.
And for some reason
it just tore me apart,
to the point where I
found out-- I ended up--
I was in my father's
arms, and sobbing.
And he was a person who
was-- like many people-- was
like, little boys
should not cry.
And yet there was so
much pain coming through
that he was a bit bewildered.
And so that was my first memory
of having that real caring
of something deep,
that there's something
going on here that isn't right.
And then after I left-- I was
raised in the Episcopal church.
And after I left the Episcopal
church, I kind of just
followed the modern mind way
of proceeding with life--
going to college
and getting a job,
but never quite
feeling like I fit in.
And at a certain
point, I was part
of a nonprofit organization
called the Pachamama Alliance.
And Pachamama--
>> REGINA: Lynne Twist--
>> CHRISTOPHER: Yes, Lynne
Twist, and Bill Twist--
>> REGINA: John.
>> CHRISTOPHER: John Perkins.
And I loved how they
came into existence
by the call of the
rainforest, by the call
of the people of the rainforest.
But my experience
with them-- when
they have the Awakening the
Dream or Changing the Dream
symposium, and within that
particular symposium, they
tell the new story.
And that's what reawakened
my real desire to, ooh,
there's a story here that
really needs to be told,
and I want to learn
more about it.
And that's where this really
had its-- had its beginnings.
>> DAVID CHRISTOPHER:
Let's do something here.
Let's talk about
the creation story
as it's posed in this book.
And let's start with
the way this is set up.
And again, you're merging
science with spirituality.
>> CHRISTOPHER: Yes.
>> REGINA: And so start telling
us the story of how the Earth
was-- how the cosmos and
universe and the Earth itself,
how the formation of the
lifeforms that we see and are
familiar with occurred.
>> CHRISTOPHER: So
I can tell you--
there's about a two-minute
story I can tell you.
So it starts with the Seeker
and the Sage have been together.
And the Sage, at one
point, says, you know,
let's look at your-- you
need a foundational story.
Why don't we start with that?
And then we'll talk
about the other issues
that you have in
relation to that story.
So she begins with
this, and it's
entitled "The Infinite and
the Creation of the Cosmos."
"It was the beginning
of all beginnings.
It was a time of no
time, for time did not
exist, a place of no place,
for space did not exist.
It was a beginning like no
other, for there was no before.
There was no time.
There was no place.
There was only the infinite
and the unfathomable mystery.
And the unfathomable mystery
was all that was to be.
And all that was to
be was small, smaller
than the tiniest particle in
the tiniest atom in the tiniest
dream, although
there was nowhere
from which to see how small
all that was to be was.
For there was no outside and
no inside, no here, no there,
no now, and no then, no
darkness, and no light.
There was nothing, save a
whisper of what might be,
an infinitesimal, indescribable,
unfathomable mystery.
And out of the
unfathomable mystery
the infinite called
forth to itself.
It called forth space.
It called forth time.
It called forth being.
And in that ecstatic
instant, the universe
slammed exploding [BOOM]
outward into existence,
with all the jubilant
and breathtaking beauty,
brightness, energy,
violence, power,
and glory of a
trillion newborn stars.
It was a perfect explosion.
One trillionth of a second
slower, and the universe
would collapse back into
itself, unfulfilled.
One trillionth of
a second faster,
and the universe would spin out,
dissipating into nothingness,
never to create
galaxies, stars, planets,
life, nor us-- a
perfect explosion.
And in the instance of
this perfect explosion,
the infinite began a
brilliant and fierce cycle
of gloriously creating,
violently destroying,
and gloriously
creating once more,
as if it knew what
it was doing."
>> REGINA: Yes, as if it
knew what it was doing.
Let's talk about that
in the context of what
we're finding
ourself facing today.
Pachamama Alliance
is really very
active in helping us
understand the larger
effects of ecological
collapse or devastation.
But the way this Sage
and Seeker discuss it,
it comes off
slightly differently.
Because in a sense,
everything is part of a cycle
and is perfect.
And this is an area
people get stuck in.
If everything is, in
the spiritual sense,
exactly as it should be
and perfect in this moment,
then why do I need to
do anything at all?
So a lot of people
have this feeling
and believe that this
is-- what can you
do if it's already destined?
So answer to that.
>> CHRISTOPHER: Well
that, in a sense,
there is some truth to that.
When you look at this universe's
history of 13.8 billion years,
and just this flash of
time within Earth's history
that humanity has
only been alive,
if you took a 24-hour clock,
and every hour was that the 24
hours were lined up with a
timeline of the universe,
humanity appeared in
the last 10 seconds.
And Earth has gone through
extinctions before.
We're now going through
what's called the Sixth Mass
Extinction.
So the process of dysfunction
is something the universe does.
So in a way, that it is
doing what it is doing.
But we are part of
that creative process.
And so, when I look out
at a landscape that's
been devastated or I look
at litter on the street,
or you look at
that ugliness that
is the indicator that
there's something wrong here,
there's a dysfunction
going on here,
I'm listening to my heart.
And there's part of my heart
that says this isn't right.
There's something
that feels off here.
And there's something
that needs to be done.
So it's almost a paradox.
In a way, one has to hold
both at the same time,
that yes, the
infinite has its ways.
And we're part of its process.
In a sense, perhaps,
everything is perfect.
And yet our hearts
call us to-- there
is something wrong with the
deep injustices in the world.
There's something want-- wrong
with the ecological devastation
that we're creating.
And the two are intertwined.
One, the world view that
causes our social inequities
and injustices is
the same worldview
that would clear-cut
the rainforest
or dam a river without
paying attention
to the ecological consequences
or over-fish the oceans.
It's the same world view that's
causing that destruction.
>> REGINA: It's like a
fractured type of thinking.
It's not holistic in nature,
not considering anything
beyond its own
instant gratification
of some agenda in the
moment, whether it's
personal, corporate,
or political.
>> CHRISTOPHER: Yes.
And that's the story of
modern mind that we created.
And we created it, really,
about 10,000 years ago.
What the Sage calls
ancient mind--
>> REGINA: Yes, go into that,
because that's interesting
the way it was put together.
>> CHRISTOPHER: Well, the
ancient mind is what the Sage
uses for when we became aware
of ourselves as homo sapiens.
So, depending on which
science you look at,
it's somewhere between
50,000 to 100,000 years ago
is when we really started
getting good at language
as a species.
And that's when we started
telling ourselves stories.
So that's the idea
of ancient mind.
And then we spread across Earth
and created 10,000 cultures
and 10,000 languages.
But underneath all
of that experience,
there was an underlying story,
a fundamental story of we
are connected.
We are part of creation.
We are one species of many.
We're no better,
but we're no worse.
We're part of the web of life.
And in a way, if
you look at it just
from a strict physical
standpoint, you had to be.
Because if you didn't know
which plants were OK to eat,
and which ones were medicine,
and which ones were poisonous,
you wouldn't, from an
evolutionary standpoint,
you wouldn't survive.
And there would
be no procreation
and your line wouldn't continue.
So you had to have
that-- which animals were
safe to eat, how do you find
the ones that you're hunting,
which ones to avoid because
you may be the prey yourself.
And then about
10,000 years ago, we
started getting serious about
agriculture in a systemic way.
We'd done agriculture
before as a species,
but it's the
systemic agriculture
that started telling a
story of separateness,
that we are separate
from the universe.
We are separate from each other.
We're separate from
the web of life.
And we can do whatever we want
to it without consequence.
And so the broad sweep
is that ancient mind
was created somewhere
between 150,000 years ago.
And about 10,000
years ago, we began
to step away from that
story into the story
of modern mind, which
is one of separation.
And as we got serious about
the Industrial Revolution,
and the Renaissance, and
European Enlightenment,
we became very deep into
that story of separation--
that, not only are we separate,
the universe isn't even alive.
It's a dead universe
with no meaning.
>> REGINA: So that
is, in essence,
moving from the instinctive or
animal mind to the intellectual
mind, shift away
from the instinctive.
>> CHRISTOPHER:
Yes, very much so.
>> REGINA: But
one thing is that,
if you're looking at the
instinctive aspect of self,
then that would certainly
penetrate into much other finer
dimensional fields
of consciousness.
Is there an area in which
the levels of consciousness
and creative forces is explained
within the realm of string
theory, quantum
sciences, and so forth?
And I'm setting this
up for a reason.
I'm asking for a reason.
>> CHRISTOPHER: I go
to a place-- well,
there's the third mind
that's now emerging,
which is called planetary mind.
And that's a term that Pierre
Teilhard de Chardin used,
and other people have
used, to describe
the world view that
is now emerging.
And I don't precisely talk about
string theory or that quantum
mechanics, but that is...
informs the story of
planetary mind, which
is the story of the creative
force of the infinite
flows throughout the universe
and through each one of us,
ever creative,
seizing catastrophe
to create anew, as
it drives itself
towards ever greater complexity,
ever greater order, and ever
greater beauty, as it
drives itself toward life.
It's always been thus.
We never were separate.
And so there's a
part of the book that
talks about the story
of planetary mind--
>> REGINA: Yes, in a more
poetic and abstract way.
>> CHRISTOPHER: Yes, that,
in a sense-- and in fact,
there's a piece that I
wrote right after that.
It talks about
planetary mind knows
that there is no creator
separate from the created.
There is only creation that
flows throughout each one of us
and flows throughout
the web of life.
And it's interesting because, in
a way, it's something you feel.
You really can't
describe so much.
And I haven't really gotten
my logical head around it.
But it's not like
there is a separate god
or a separate creator.
We are the spirit in
the form of Regina.
We are the spear in
the form of David,
or the form of human beings.
We are the universe in
the form of a human being.
>> REGINA: And, albeit, an
individuated aspect of it.
>> CHRISTOPHER: Yes, and we have
this evolutionary heritage that
we carry in our bodies.
We have not four separate
brains, but four aspects
of our brains-- the
old lizard brain,
and then the mammalian
brain, and what's
called the "monkey mind"
brain, and then the neocortex.
And they're all very much tied
into a physical evolution.
But my feeling is
that somehow it's
using that to engage
into the universe
into its creative process, that
it's the physical manifestation
of perhaps a consciousness
that was there
at the unfathomable mystery.
>> REGINA: And in a sense,
even as the animal portion
of ourselves.
I view it as kind of a two-for
species imbued with something
beyond that also of a
multi-dimensional nature.
>> CHRISTOPHER: Oh, yes.
>> REGINA: But nonetheless, the
portion that was acting more
instinctively, as
far as I view it,
was really much more in touch
with the multi-dimensional
aspect of life.
Because it was receiving
these unconscious inputs
all the time, which
helped with survival.
But it also helped with
other higher understandings,
as we know from even
40,000-year-old cave art.
There's some very sophisticated
and conceptually sublime
cave art from 40,000
years ago, and plus.
>> CHRISTOPHER: Yes.
And there's a thought
that, as you were talking,
there is that intuition
is denigrated,
and if you take a strictly
evidentiary-based scientific
view of looking at reality
as the only way of getting
to truth, then that
non-rational reality
is denigrated to the point
where we become strangers
to ourselves.
We become strangers to that
older animal part of ourselves,
which hasn't gone away.
And it knows that
something is wrong.
But this part of the brain
and this part of our psyche
has been told the
story-- and has
bought a story--
that's at odds with it.
So no wonder we have
this dysfunction
that happens within us and
the stress that we feel.
>> REGINA: And the thing
is it's the feelings--
and I separate that from
the word "emotions."
It's the feelings that will
guide us back to the truth,
because that permeates all.
That's the finer aspect
that's called, also,
the intuitive part, right.
And that part, as several
thousand years ago,
once we entered into a
dominantly patriarchal world
planetary structure, that
had to be given way to.
And by then, it
was even considered
unholy or evil to use
one's intuition, which
is a feminine aspect
of all of our beings.
So you chose to have
the Sage as a female,
and as a female of indistinct
ethnicity, as a matter of fact.
And so tell us, bringing that
up, why did you choose that?
>> CHRISTOPHER: Well, the Sage
actually started out as a man,
and in fact, in my mind,
I saw two white men.
And I can't remember
exactly when,
but it became very clear that
this is just not going to fly.
This is what caused the
problem in the first place--
is a very narrow
view of reality,
the male and Eurocentric
view of reality.
And it became clear that,
no, you can't do that.
And I started
realizing that you're
going to have to make
the Sage a woman.
And I was very
nervous about that
because, at least
in this incarnation,
I have no idea what
it's like to be a woman.
So I was very hesitant
to put the words
in the mouth of a woman,
especially a woman of color.
But I knew I had to try.
I would rather fail
spectacularly than
to take the safe route,
which would have certainly
been a failure.
It wouldn't have worked.
>> REGINA: It wouldn't
have worked the same.
>> CHRISTOPHER: It
wouldn't have flown.
And so at a certain point,
I was being asked well,
who is the Sage?
Tell us more about her.
And there was a
young woman who was--
her name is Amber
Espinoza-Jones.
And she wrote this
wonderful piece
for Destiny Arts, which
is out of Oakland.
They work with at-risk youth and
teach them theater and martial
arts.
And she wrote this
one wonderful piece,
talking about what it
was like to have heritage
from all continents, that
people ask her, well,
what are you are you?
Are you Arab?
Are you Mexican?
Are you Black?
And actually, no, he says.
You can't be black
with that hair.
And she says, I
want to tell them--
I may be able to
recite some of it.
I like to tell people that
I'm a daughter of Oakland.
I find homage in the slave and
the slave master-- Grandfather,
the conquered,
Grandfather, the conqueror.
My table is set with creme
brulee, homemade tortillas,
things that should not belong
together on a kitchen table.
And she says she's some part
African, European, Australian,
Jamaican, and just has this
heritage that she brings
into the piece, "Gumbo
Pot for the Soul."
And when I heard her perform
that, I said, my God.
There's the Sage.
And this was something that
was so amazing to have emerge.
Because it wasn't intentional.
It wasn't planned.
It just emerged
that this character
became the metaphor for
that part of humanity
which our modern mind
has denigrated and put
down for so long.
And that conversation
of privilege
that I get to enjoy-- as
white, male, and heterosexual,
I enjoy certain privileges
that are unconscious, largely.
And the reason why I bring
this up and talk about it,
is that it's part
of the work that I
think needs to be
done during our time.
It's part of the
conversation we need
to have as we bring
planetary mind forth.
Because as I said, that
worldview of privilege
is part of the problem, when we
deal with the ecological crises
that we're facing, and even
the spiritual crises that we're
facing, too-- that women are
supposed to look a certain way.
Men are supposed to
be a certain way.
There was a couple who asked
a question of an audience
at the Bioneers conference.
And they asked two questions.
And they asked of the men--
it was something like,
how many people in
the audience grew up
with a feeling that you have
to serve in the military,
and it is your duty to do so?
And the people who
raised their hand
tended to be
overwhelmingly male.
And then they asked the
question, when you walk down
a dark street at
night, how many of you
had the experience of
being afraid and unwilling
and wanting to turn away because
of the fear, of because of who
you were as a gender?
And all the women
raise their hands.
>> REGINA: This is true.
>> CHRISTOPHER: And that's
part of that conversation.
>> REGINA: Yes, and there has
been research done on this,
just in terms of brain chemistry
alone that's important to note.
>> CHRISTOPHER:
And it's automatic.
>> REGINA: Yes.
It's deeply embedded within our
subconscious, this very aspect
you talked about--
about privilege.
And that is the levels
of dopamine and serotonin
production, particularly
serotonin production in women,
is quite a bit lower
than that in men,
which is also reflected
in eating habits.
It's reflected in the
way women socialize.
Women will go more for
carbohydrates and sweet things,
which boosts, temporarily,
serotonin levels, for example.
And that's just an effect
of almost genetically--
well, beyond genetically--
in the field,
passed on relationship to
self and self-identity.
And the same thing with
different minority groups
responded differently.
But again, compared to the white
male-- the white, as you say,
Eurocentro male-- everyone
else on this planet
produces a lower
level, generally--
these are generalizations--
a lower level
of serotonin and dopamine,
which are those "let's
get her done"
feel-good chemicals.
Now, I know that has to
be shifting, as well.
>> CHRISTOPHER: Yes.
>> REGINA: As there becomes more
confusion and clouding around
roles and our
place in the world.
>> CHRISTOPHER: Yes, well the
old structures need to come
down, as we're building
the new structures.
I mean, you don't
know if they have
to be razed entirely
before you create them.
>> REGINA: Exactly, you
can create it anyway.
>> CHRISTOPHER: I have
a feeling they're both--
as the one structures
are coming down,
the other structures
are coming up--
>> REGINA: Absolutley.
>> CHRISTOPHER:
--at the same time.
And there's actually
a point there, too,
is that it not only is
a cultural thing that
is created that is passed down.
It also is genetic.
We have this desire to go after
the sugar, fat, and sweets,
because that's what
caused us to survive.
It was rare.
It's hard to make
that stuff in nature.
>> REGINA: That's true.
>> CHRISTOPHER: The web of
life takes a lot of time.
It's a lot of energy.
So it doesn't throw out fat,
sugar, and salt out there
just everywhere.
So when it was rare, it was
the most important thing
for men and women
to do, was to find
that salt, that sugar, and fat.
And now, we go to the grocery
store, and there it is.
And I had this wonderful-- this
actual particular piece came
out of Michael Dowd's
work, a man who
wrote with Connie
Barlow, a book called
"Thank God for Evolution,"
where he talks about how there's
nothing morally wrong with you
that you can't resist sweets.
There is this burning desire for
life that says eat the sweets.
>> REGINA: That's true,
because we think--
>> CHRISTOPHER:
Because we need to
>> REGINA: --they're
normally safe.
Yes.
They are normally safe
as well, historically,
when we were in a more--
>> CHRISTOPHER: So we have this
amazing complexity of genetics,
as well as cultural stories,
that say, behave this way.
And we get into really
amazing craziness sometimes.
>> REGINA: Yeah, we do.
I remember what I was
going to ask you about.
And it had to do with the way
the species was assembling
itself in the
earlier life forms.
And this is a really
important one right now.
And the Sage was mentioning
that, remember, once
upon a time, the
oxygen on your planet
was even devastating
to the life forms.
And now, then we
came to continue
maturing, becoming more
complex, as species go,
to where we needed-- the
one thing we need is oxygen,
above and beyond anything else.
And now we're in a state
of oxygen decline again.
And yet we have an influx
of increased radiation,
for example-- lots of
radiation, not necessarily
all from the sun.
We know some of what's
going on around the planet.
And so, when I looked at
that part of the book,
where the Sage was talking
about everything is in a cycle.
Everything creates
and destroys--
>> CHRISTOPHER: Yes,
the infinite destroys,
therefore it must create.
The infinite creates,
therefore it must destroy.
>> REGINA: So how--
because you wrote it.
You wrote her.
Let's talk about what you
were trying to say there.
Because you are
trying not to put
too much judgment
on the fact that,
yes, things are falling away.
Yes, it was devastating
to you as a child.
But at the same time, that
allows space for new creation,
as well.
Are we going to be creating
on a different level,
from your mind's eye?
>> CHRISTOPHER: Well, and
that's-- as you were talking,
this one thought sprang to me
of serendipity is what emerges
at the confluence of
chance and creativity.
And so that--
>> REGINA: It's like another
saying is no problem arises
without a simultaneous
solution being there.
>> CHRISTOPHER: Yes.
And the idea that-- I
mean, we can certainly
get into our old
stories of how we
were wounded when we were young.
And that's very true.
There was realities
that we all had.
But to stay in that
story doesn't serve.
And then-- I love that
particular part of the Oxygen
Catastrophe--
>> REGINA: I do, too.
>> CHRISTOPHER: --too,
where, especially--
and sometimes I
would be writing,
and I would set my
pencil down and say,
where in the world
did this come from?
Where the beings who
invented photosynthesis--
they gave off oxygen, a
vile and poisonous fire that
turned the color-- the color of
the sky an ominous deadly blue.
And when I tell that
story sometimes,
I'm next to a window, and
I'll look at the blue sky.
And people will look at
me and say, wait a minute.
Blue is a good color.
But no, it wasn't.
It was devastating.
>> REGINA: Yes, and even
if you look into the notion
of extraterrestrial visitors,
it's often said that our oxygen
is very harsh and damaging
to them on a physical level.
They can't handle that oxygen
that we thrive on, but are
going to have to become
less dependent on.
>> CHRISTOPHER: Well, yeah.
And the metaphor there,
and actually the reality,
is that the oxygen crisis--
James Lovelock wrote about this
in-- I forget which exact book,
either "Gaia" or "The Ages
of Gaia," where he talks
about how life became
that close to being snuffed out
because of this catastrophe.
Similar to what
we're facing now,
is that we-- I don't think we
would wipe out all of life,
but we certainly are doing
an enormous amount of damage.
And we're certainly
at risk for losing
all the creatures
of the higher order.
>> REGINA: Of the current
matrix of the web of life,
it is being--
>> CHRISTOPHER: It's
going to be devastated.
>> REGINA: And
perhaps irrevocably--
>> CHRISTOPHER: Perhaps.
>> REGINA: --altered.
>> CHRISTOPHER: We don't know.
>> REGINA: We don't know.
>> CHRISTOPHER: Why take
that chance, really.
>> REGINA: Well,
and again, I mean,
we're at a point now where
we are officially an oxygen
deprived planet, for
what our life form--
Our immune system is
dependent on oxygen.
We're not getting enough
oxygen around this planet,
save for maybe if you still
live in a nicely hydrated area
in the Amazon.
But so much of it's
been-- the lungs
of the planet have been
cleared, to a large extent.
We can't regrow it fast enough,
if we were to start today.
So now, how do you look at that
in the sense of perfection?
>> CHRISTOPHER: Well,
the question then arises
in my mind-- and a similar
thing happens when I think about
the plastic that's
in the oceans.
And there's a part of me
that is devastated by it.
And there's another
part that thinks,
what is the web of life
going to do with this?
Is it going to do something
with this catastrophe?
And it's behaved as if it knows
what it's doing for so long.
There's a part of me
that thinks that there
will be a new kind
of consciousness that
arises within humanity.
Perhaps we needed to
go through this stage.
That modern mind, itself,
needed to go through almost
an adolescent stage
and actually face
the reality of
death, which is often
a marker between
adolescence and adulthood is
facing the fact that
you could die here.
A lot of initiatory rituals
in cultures of ancient mind
had initiations that
you actually might die.
You might not actually survive.
And it's through that
fire of initiation,
it's quite possible that
when we wake up and realize,
my God, what have we
done, that we might--
that might bring us to a
new level of awareness,
and perhaps new ways of
being, and new-- at one point,
the Sage says, just like the
monarch caterpillar, whose
whole universe is
an entire tree,
has no idea what's
going to happen when
she springs wings and flies off.
>> REGINA: And who knows?
I mean, I brought this up in
one other interview recently,
because I was contemplating
the same thing you are.
And in Edgar Cayce's readings
from more than a half
a century ago, it
talked about a time
when Japan would suffer from
deep radiation poisoning,
and many of the life forms
around would be killed off.
Now, if you're
looking at the fact
that he was somewhere
between 80 and 90%
accurate on his visions,
then where was radiation,
as part of our future, already
starting to accumulate?
This was, I believe,
before we even
had the H-bomb,
A-bomb, and so forth.
So is it possible that, as
we're depleting on oxygen,
that the increase in
radiation of different kinds
is actually going to create
a new adaptation in all life
forms on the planet?
Is it possible just looking at
this poisonous oxygen analogy?
>> CHRISTOPHER: Well, it is.
It's not only possible.
That's what's going to happen,
if we have this enormous influx
of radiation that is
happening in Fukushima.
If we have the chemistry of
Earth changing, by definition,
evolution is going
to work its magic.
Now, whether or not
it is a collapse,
like as what happened 65 million
years ago when the asteroid hit
Earth, if it's a collapse,
that's one thing.
And there's a part of me
that it feels heartbreaking.
Do we really need to create a
collapse to go through that?
>> REGINA: Or we
might just adapt.
>> CHRISTOPHER: Or
we might just adapt.
It's quite possible that--
well, certainly we will adapt.
But there's a part of it
feels-- there's a part
of the symposium-- the
Pachamama Alliance symposium--
that talks about the sacred
talismanic fellow creatures
of ours that we're
about to lose forever--
>> REGINA: Yeah,
that is devastating.
>> CHRISTOPHER: --the tigers,
the elephants, the gorillas,
the higher, what we call
more complex forms of life,
which might be a
bit of a prejudice.
But at any rate, we're about
to lose these partners forever.
And they won't come back.
And there's a part
of me that just,
when I see the cheetah running
across the screen, and saying
will this be the last time?
Will the only cheetah be
that we see is in a book?
It rends my heart, as
much as it rends my heart
to see the vastness
of the slums--
>> REGINA: Yes,
it's devastating.
>> CHRISTOPHER: --in
part of our cultures.
>> REGINA: It's devastating.
>> CHRISTOPHER: So
yes, we will adapt.
There will be an adaptation.
Certainly our civilizations
will not continue as they are.
They can't.
>> REGINA: No, they can't.
I think I've done
probably a hundred plus
interviews on that
subject alone.
It can't continue that way.
>> CHRISTOPHER: But whether
we will survive as a species,
quite likely.
We're pretty resilient.
We're smart.
But there's no guarantees.
And the Sage says that.
There's no guarantees.
Why take the risk?
>> REGINA: I agree.
And then, for me, there's
always a silver lining.
Because I'm always
going for as far out as
I can conceive of, anyway.
And the notion that,
if our planet has
gone through a sub-dimensional
or a dimensional shift
during this last period of
time that is in process,
is it possible whatever
existed in the purely
third-dimensional aspect, is
no longer essentially necessary
there?
But maybe it's already
existing into a higher
dimensional field?
Is it possible that even
some of these species
have evolved themselves
into-- along with the planet--
into this higher level of
functioning, maybe elsewhere,
maybe visible on a
screen elsewhere?
That's like the big--
>> CHRISTOPHER: Possible.
>> REGINA: --far-out place I go
to look at what it is possible
in all of this besides the
physical 3 or 4D reality
we're in.
>> CHRISTOPHER: And who knows?
I mean one of the topics
that the Sage talks
about is that there, perhaps,
when birds are calling
and when animals are
calling to one another,
maybe they're not just doing
it for evolutionary purposes.
Maybe they're telling
their stories.
>> REGINA: That's right.
>> CHRISTOPHER: Maybe there's
a consciousness of the plants,
which have been here for
hundreds of million of years.
Maybe they have
something to teach us.
>> REGINA: You think?
Seeing as how they're our
greatest healing allies.
>> CHRISTOPHER: Yeah.
And it's going to take an
amazing shift in consciousness
to really see how interdependent
we are on the biosphere.
And it's astonishing
at how little that
penetrates in the
common culture.
And it's also
astonishing to see how
things are shifting
in the common culture.
>> REGINA: It is.
I see more shift than
maybe some people
do because I'm looking for it.
I agree that that's part of it.
But also just at large,
conversations with strangers,
I do have hope.
Now, granted it's
still not the majority
of the human
population, but there
is an exponential increase
in awareness that I'm seeing.
>> CHRISTOPHER: And there's a
wonderful little metaphor that
I borrowed from the symposium
that talks about how,
when a caterpillar goes into
the metamorphosis state,
there are cells called
the imaginal cells--
and I think Elizabet Sahtouris
was the one who coined
the term-- that
start to take over.
And they begin to separate.
Their genetic instructions
start to take over.
And the amazing thing...
part about it is that the
immune system of the caterpillar
begins to attack it
as a foreign body.
And it's a wonderful
metaphor for those
who are waking up, that if
you're starting to be attacked,
you're probably on
the right track.
>> REGINA: Exactly.
And just on a closing note,
because it seems appropriate.
About a week ago,
a friend handed me
a little bottle of palo
santo essential oil,
which I've never used.
And I love essential oils.
And he said you might want
to meditate with this.
I thought, really?
OK.
So I rubbed a little dot
here, and it was profound.
And what I saw is, within
less than a minute,
my awareness was inside a tree,
following it down to the roots,
and then to the
fungi on the roots,
and then to the world of fungi.
And that kingdom just
started talking, so to speak.
And I didn't ingest anything,
just a little drop right here.
And it started showing me
that we haven't been paying
close enough attention
to the world of mycelium,
that the world of
fungus is actually
going to be bridging us
over, through the state
of our evolution and adaptation,
and many, many life forms
on Earth, not humans,
all life forms on Earth--
that the mycelium was
going to act as a bridge.
And it has this
innate intelligence
that is profound and beyond
what we ordinarily think.
We just think of them in terms
of magic mushrooms, Psilocybin,
and highs and that.
No, it was showing me
that in microscopic form,
to these large vast
areas of interconnected
fungi under the ground,
that that was going
to be a partner in our now
future evolution and help
remediate, also, some of the
effects of the radiation on all
of the life forms here.
And so I started
calling up people,
like Compton Rom, Barbara
Hand Clow, and others
that are saying,
yes, that's true.
And told me some more,
so I have great hope.
>> CHRISTOPHER: Paul Stamets.
>> REGINA: Paul
Stamets, absolutely.
>> CHRISTOPHER: The little
guys are working on it.
>> REGINA: The little
guys are working on it,
even if we are not.
And on that, I just
have to say thank
you so much for
doing what you did.
>> CHRISTOPHER: Well,
thank you so much.
>> REGINA: And it's a very
beautiful piece of work.
>> CHRISTOPHER: All right.
Thank you.
I appreciate it.
>> REGINA: Elegant and profound,
this book is a beautiful way
to introduce meaningful
discussion to people that are
spiritual, but do not belong
to a religious ideology,
and maybe not even scientific.
Again, the book is titled
"The Holy Universe."
And many of today's
top minds are giving it
high praise, which it deserves.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[MUSIC PLAYING]